hey everyone lost lo Montgomery here
after a little break since about the
time of the Chi Fung Jews episode up
until now I've been consumed by other
pressing matters so regretfully the CHP
had to take a back seat but we're back
today this is a topic so many have
requested over the years and of course a
lot of my Canadian cousins have waited a
long time for this one
not that they don't know about him
already today we look at the life of dr.
Norman Bethune - most China as
specialists he's best known as the
Canadian doctor who went to China and
treated Red Army soldiers in the
battlefield and himself ended up being a
casualty of the Chinese war of
resistance against the Japanese
occupation on a simple level that pretty
much describes the part of his life that
merits inclusion into the China history
podcast but he was also a man with laser
guided passion for the causes that
matter to him he was not only a
physician but a poet a writer an artist
a communist an engineer and technical
innovator as well
he had a driving compassion for his
fellow man and this compassion would
lead him to the battlefields of Spain
and China I thought let's try and do
this heroic life well-lived some justice
and bring his story to all of you I
thought today I talked about who he was
where he came from what shaped him what
kind of guy was Norman Bethune and what
events led him to that hovel in the
village of Wong Circle in Hebei where he
died on the morning of November 12th
1939 the Chinese know him as bi chillin
he was born March 4th 1890 in
Gravenhurst Ontario in Canada not that I
have ever been to Canada or can't speak
for the people there but around the
world Norman Bethune is often called the
most famous Canadian I haven't read any
polls or heard that this was proven Neil
Young and Mark Rose well
must be strong competition Justin Bieber
and Celine Dion - he was of Scottish
Canadian ancestry born Henry Norman
Bethune his parents were the Reverend
Malcolm Nicholson and Elizabeth Bethune
although not a religious man later on in
a strict religious upbringing you know
his father being a member of the
Presbyterian clergy and all his early
years were spent in and around
Gravenhurst visiting Beaverton blind
river Sol st. and Toronto of course
summers were often spent around the
Muskoka Lakes he graduated from the Owen
Sound collegiate Vocational Institute in
1907 he attended the University of
Toronto as a pre-med student briefly in
1911-12 working and teaching English to
illiterate Lumberjacks
and miners up in whitefish this is just
west of Sudbury yes Sudbury birthplace
of mr. Alex Trebek of Jeopardy Fame he
also served as a reporter for the
Winnipeg telegram this gave Bethune a
first platform to showcase his writing
skills I'm gonna read one of Bethune's
works later on he was a rather a
prolific writer of letters and essays
and you can see in his words the passion
and commitment he had to the cause as he
believed in after Norman Bethune
finished this frontier college program
up in Whitefish teaching English and
cutting down trees he went back to
finish his medical studies at the
University of Toronto but not for long
fate intervened as it always does to all
of us from time to time and he enlisted
in the Army where he served in World War
one as a stretcher bearer with the
number two Field Ambulance Army Medical
Corps he was present at Ypres in 1915
and was wounded by shrapnel in that
second battle that took the lives of
over a hundred thousand men on both
sides the first Canadian division
performed heroically and victoriously
over the Germans who used poison gas for
the first time in battle at the defence
of Saint julienne Kitchener's would
bethune over the next six months
recovered from his will
and hospitals in England and afterwards
he got back to his studies at the
University of Toronto and graduated in
December 1916
four months later prematurely gray and
aged from his World War one experience
he joined the Navy and served as a
surgeon lieutenant aboard the HMS
Pegasus yes before the nimitz-class
supercarriers there were these early 300
or so feet long aircraft seaplane
carriers Bethune served on this ship for
14 months he was 28 years old and was in
Paris when Germany surrendered from
there he carried on with his medical
studies interning first at the Great
Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children
in London England
many of you have heard of this
institution it's the one that received
the rights to the play Peter Pan by Sir
James Matthew berry first baronet
Bethune worked and studied Bethune
worked and studied at the West London
hospital and later up in Scotland the
land of his ancestors at the Royal
Infirmary in Edinburgh in Edinburgh he
was elected a fellow of the Royal
College of Surgeons
February 3rd 1922 he spent all his time
divided up between working and
performing surgery and of course
studying and all-night drinking and
partying binges despite earning a
reputation for brilliance as a surgeon
he had also developed a rather
flamboyant lifestyle which he embraced
throughout the rest of his remaining
years that is until he went to China
there in Edinburgh 34 year-old Norman
Bethune met and marry 22 year-old
Francis Penney this was in 1923 they
were quite a couple opposites in every
way their one-year honeymoon travelling
around Europe was followed up by
dazzling success in his new Detroit
medical practice why Detroit of all
places in those days it was the next
best place to be in America short of NYC
and for a Canadian like dr. Norman
Bethune it was perfect right across the
border from Canada
Detroit was so close to Canada one
didn't even have to live in the u.s. to
work there once he hooked up with the
right physicians in town Bethune's
surgery practice just mushroomed and the
old days with Frances scrimping and
saving to keep their heads above water
were over with his newfound success in
Detroit money and success just started
pouring in he was a dyed-in-the-wool
communist leaning man of the people now
living in the world of the upper crust
on the correct side of capitalism for
once from this lofty perch he saw how
the health care system he was
championing and benefiting from was only
as good as the size of one's bank
account as soon as he achieved all this
success and respect from all his
colleagues in the Detroit medical
community
he became very disillusioned he found
the whole system that he was part of to
be very unethical when he had his
private practice in Detroit Norman and
Frances were happy together living the
good life but he also gave freely of
himself to serve the needy of Detroit's
poorest neighborhoods on the heels of
all the success and happiness and
hedonistic living in 1926 Norman Bethune
contracted TB tuberculosis back in the
mid 20s was still considered a probable
death sentence and in Bethune's case his
prognosis was dismal to say the least
for the next several years Norman
Bethune fought the good fight living in
a number of TB sanatoria there he
prepared for the worst and hoped for the
best he offered himself up as a guinea
pig and some medical experimentation on
a new method of curing TB this was known
as artificial pneumothorax this is a
procedure that allows the lung to heal
after its stricken with TB it was
pioneered in the late 1880s and was
still not perfected but this new and
experimental treatment worked in
Bethune's case and he was able to cheat
death this one time by December 1920
seven he was cured or sputum negative as
they say in the trade Norman and Francis
Bethune had divorced so sure was heaved
that he was not going to make it he knew
his life was finished and he urged
Francis to divorce him and go back to
Scotland once he began to make his
miraculous comeback from TB they married
again briefly before storms overtook the
marriage one last time in 1933 it was an
early 1928 that Norman Bethune emerged
from the Trudeau sanatorium in upstate
New York he surely must have felt he had
been given a fresh new lease on life he
was in a state of euphoria from his good
fortune from the stuff I've read mostly
on the Internet as he began his last
decade as a mortal human being in 1929
he really did live each day like it was
possibly his last Bethune took a
position as a thoracic surgeon at the
Royal Victoria Hospital alongside a
great pioneer in the field Edward
William Archibald known as Canada's
first neurosurgeon and specialist as
well in tuberculosis these were the
years where Bethune embraced the
bohemian lifestyle with one arm and
medicine with the other and showed equal
passion for both it was during these
Montreal years that Bethune developed
his great understanding of his craft in
the course of his work as a surgeon at
the Royal Victoria Hospital Norman
Bethune pioneered the development of
several innovative medical instruments
that were used in the fight against that
which he hated above all else this
disease caused by the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis the Bethune rib shares are
still in use around the world today his
table mounted scapula retractor known in
the trade as the iron intern was a
forerunner of the automatic table
retractors also used today in many
surgical procedures involving the thorax
and abdomen he threw his life into this
and it wasn't just for the sake of
finding new ways to fight this disease
what drove him even harder was to
and learn about the social and economic
aspects of TB
he knew poverty and TB went hand in hand
he was one of the earliest back in the
30s advocating for free medical care for
all and he walked the walk too he was
giving free medical care to people who
were sick and you know had been so
ravaged by the depression to the extent
that these poor couldn't tend to their
ailments or those of their children
during this Montreal Perry at the calm
before the storm in the summer of 1935
Norman Bethune attended an international
physiological conference in the Soviet
Union there he was able to observe
firsthand how they handled public health
care he was already on board the
socialism bandwagon before he went to
the USSR but he came back more convinced
than ever that this was the way to go
there was no other way to lift the poor
up he had come back to Canada a
committed communist and certain that
socialized medicine was the only way to
address the health care needs of
Canada's poor remember this is the
Depression era times were tough in 1936
General Francisco Franco carried out his
coup against the elected government in
Madrid and this kicked off the whole
spanish civil war between the
Nationalists on the right who were also
known as the fascists squaring off
against the Democratic Republican
loyalists Norman Bethune also had a
special place in his heart for fascism
he kept it right next to tuberculosis
both were objects of his hatred and
being the committed anti-fascist that he
was when he received an invitation from
the committee to aid Spanish democracy
to go help the Republicans in their
fight against Franco's nationalists like
many other Canadian communists Bethune
joined the Mackenzie Papineau battalion
and with 1,500 men was shipped off to
Madrid on November 3rd in 1936 he only
had three years to live and he hadn't
even been to China yet one of his
signature achievements in his remarkable
lifetime and certainly during his stint
helping the anti-fascist forces in Spain
was the
development of mobile medical unit that
were able to perform blood transfusions
right in the battlefield rather than
allowing the wounded soldiers to bleed
out first before being treated at a
hospital away from the action
this was the forerunner of the future
Mobile Army surgical hospital our mass
units this was the main focus of the
canadian volunteers in spain seeing what
was necessary for the war effort
Bethune went to London to speak with
specialists in blood transfusions after
expanding his technique he was also able
to arrange for the purchase of all kinds
of medical equipment as well as a truck
he got back to the front and helped to
organize the Canadian blood transfusion
service this was by the end of 1936 I
read some accounts that said Bethune
carried out his hedonistic lifestyle
right there in Spain his womanizing
brawling and drunken sprees were
well-known and it's rumored part of the
reason for his early departure from the
Spanish Civil War at the end of May 1937
he left under a cloud of controversy and
he knew was own actions and destructive
behavior that led to him being sent home
he came back and for the next five
months travelled across Canada and
America to raise awareness and money for
the fight against the fascists when he
made his way back to Montreal in June
1937 over a thousand people waited at
Windsor station that night of his return
he spoke extemporaneously in front of
8,000 people about what was going down
in Spain and why it was a mistake to
ignore this crisis Bethune had produced
a film called the heart of Spain that
served as a good propaganda piece to
promote his cause he went all over
Canada and the US showing this film and
speaking out for this cause it really
ripped Norman Bethune apart that in
Spain none of the other world powers
would combine to fight against fascism
the whole Spanish Civil War was what
many historians agree a dress rehearsal
for World War two Franco had hit
and Mussolini in his corner and the
Loyalists lined up against him at the
Soviet Union backing their effort for
whatever that was worth back then
wherever the oppressed were in this
world that's where Norman Bethune felt
compelled to go and with the Japanese
invasion of China following the Chi Chi
sure pian on July 7th 1937 Bethune Seitz
turned to that struggle that the Chinese
were waging against their Japanese
oppressors Bethune began to speak out
much more about what was happening in
China during his speaking tour but no
matter how much he tried to use his ways
to get the word out and rally people to
the defense of Spain and China the US
and Canadian governments hesitated in
their actions to stop this aggression
this was a huge source of Bethune's
frustration about China he couldn't
accept that despite everything that was
becoming common knowledge about what
Japan was doing in China since the
invasion no one in Ottawa or Washington
was willing to rise in China's defense
while Bethune was able to connect with a
lot of people during the speaking tour
to promote the heart of Spain at the
same time his communist affiliations
turned most people away from him in the
US and Canada to have been branded a
communist back in 1937 had a lot more
taint to it than it does today so he was
often heckled at these public gatherings
there was no small supply of fervent
anti-communist who tried to tear him
down but he was unashamed of his
communist sympathies and was convinced
communism was the only way that the poor
could get a fair shake depending on
where you stood on this issue and it was
a certifiable hot-button issue back then
as it is now you either love Norman
Bethune or aided him in October 1937 he
went to New York to prepare for his
China mission and three months later on
January 8th 1938 he sailed from
Vancouver to Hong Kong with the Canadian
American medical unit to China he
arrived in Hong Kong 19 days later in a
once he flew to Wuhan to the city of
Hong Kong he had come with a Canadian
nurse named Jean Yuen five thousand
dollars worth of medical supplies and
all the support and best wishes from his
comrades in the communist movements of
Canada and the USA in Hanko 1937 dr.
Norman Bethune gets his first taste of
China he was met there by Joe and Lai
the future premier made all the
necessary arrangements to have Norman
Bethune escorted to Yen on and he stayed
there for three weeks he had worked with
the poor and the downtrodden up front
and personal census earliest days
teaching English and laboring up in
Whitefish a quarter century before but
nothing could prepare Bethune for the
squalor and desperation he saw in
wartime China he had famously said quote
Spain and China are part of the same
battle I am going to China because that
is where the need is greatest no
industrial revolution had come to China
to plow feudalism under the ground China
was still ruled like a fiefdom with a
thin layer on top controlling the lives
and destiny of the masses of the people
and to support this whole ancient rotten
system foreign imperialist powers
insinuated themselves into the middle of
all this and profited from China's
helplessness division in the chaos
created by the Japanese invaders like
any good cause he passionately believed
in Norman Bethune Dovan head first on
February 22nd 1938 he began heading
north
destination Xian he arrived there on
March 22nd nine days later after
trekking due north he was sitting with
Mao Zedong in yen on discussing his
success with mobile medical units during
the Spanish Civil War he urged Mao to
consider the idea in aiding fallen Red
Army soldiers men could be saved if they
were given immediate attention for
simple blood transfusions to wait to get
them back to the basement
death from infection or blood loss after
meeting with the chairman
Bethune had proclaimed quote the man is
a giant he is one of the great men of
our world
I'm sure Maya would have agreed in April
1938 with miles orders he headed north
to bring these mobile operating units to
the frontlines and this fight to the
death between the Chinese resistors and
the Japanese occupiers in this second
sino-japanese war while invited Bethune
to stay and help supervise the 8th route
army the Paolo Jun to set up their
hospital it was on this project and in
fact for the entirety of a stay in yen
on that his paths crossed but the great
American doctor and humanitarian George
hate him now those who know of George
hate him will remember him from the CHP
episode 62 on for noted foreigners
buried at Baba Shan cemetery George
Hayden who I openly admit I incorrectly
pronounced Hatem was one of the four in
the pantheon of legendary law why who
came and left their mark in modern China
George Hayden my Haida was right up
there he worked with Norman Bethune in
the spring of 1938 to get all the
necessary supplies and whatnot for a
Bethune's mission what was Bethune's
mission his mission was to go right to
the front lines of combat set up his
mobile surgical units and patch up all
these Bahujan soldiers who were hit by
Japanese enemy gunfire and bombs he
operated on these fallen soldiers right
out in the open just like you see in the
movies with explosions going on and
bullets whistling through the air and
that's what he did up until his dying
day he worked tirelessly not only saving
the lives of Chinese soldiers but
Japanese as well when they were brought
in he worked day and night not only
tending to these wounded but also
teaching and training other surgical
staff with all kinds of life-saving
techniques and all the while he wrote in
his Diaries of all kinds of observations
and wrote
say after essay about the inequality of
medical service in this world in mid
1939 Bethune began working under one of
the heroes of the revolution general
yang chun-hee arrived in this ginge [ __ ]
region and began serving as a medical
adviser to the eighth route army jin was
short fur chen she cha was cha ha the
old province that is today part of inner
mongolia and gee which is an
abbreviation of club a province there
Bethune focused all passion and energies
into helping the people there inspiring
and training doctors and nurses writing
books and advising on preventive
measures to control disease in these
mountains where shun Shia Hebei come
together
he saw the worst of battle this was much
more backward and challenging than
anything he witnessed in Spain this was
pure guerilla war Bethune saw how the
eighth route Army soldiers collaborated
with the locals to harass the Japanese
army anywhere and everywhere they could
find him they carried out all the same
acts of resistance that any downtrodden
and occupied people try disrupting lines
of communication midnight raids downing
power lines laying booby traps anything
that might cause death or inconvenience
to the Japanese of course the Japanese
would come back and seek horrible
retribution on the locals and commit
terrible atrocities this was inevitable
and happened all the time but amidst all
this energy to teach to save lives
working 18-hour days
Bethune wrote quote I am tired but I
don't think I have been so happy for a
long time I am content I am doing what I
want to do and see what my riches
consist of I have vital work that
occupies every moment of my time I am
needed more than that to satisfy my
bourgeois vanity the need for me is
expressed he cried out to the doctors he
was training go to the wounded don't
wait for the wounded to come to you once
Bethune road
25 miles to attend to the wounded who
were savaged by the Japanese in northern
Shan XI there was recorded that Bethune
performed surgery on 71 wounded patients
once in March 1939 he was clocked at a
hundred and fifteen casualties treated
in a single 69 hour stretch of carnage
these mobile units he was setting up in
China consisted of two mules that lugged
all the tools of the trade necessary to
manage the battlefield needs of a
hundred patients at a time they were set
up around three miles from the front if
the Japanese turned out to be too strong
and captured by them became imminent the
whole mobile unit could be packed up and
ready to retreat into the mountains in
ten minutes
Hollywood has brought us the horrors of
today's battlefield in 3d and we see
medical technology that boggles the mind
for Norman Bethune and the villages and
mountains of China it was a wholly
different dynamic he wrote perhaps his
most famous essay in Shanxi and China
1938 it was called wounds of his entire
body of work this is considered by many
to be as finest it is a regurgitation of
events that went down over one sleepless
night of operating on wounded soldiers
after a whole day and night of raw
carnage out in the battlefield in this
polemical si Bethune the physician and
the activist expressed clearer than ever
before his passion and politics
let me read an excerpt from this piece
it's a little raw and bloody so if this
stuff bothers you you may want to hit
the fast-forward button on your cassette
player the kerosene lamp overhead makes
a steady buzzing sound like an
incandescent hive of bees mud walls mud
floor mud bed white paper windows smell
of blood and chloroform cold 3 o'clock
in the morning December first North
China near lin chu with the 8th route
army men with wounds wounds like dried
pools
caked with black brown earth wounds with
torn edges thrilled with black gangrene
neat wounds concealing beneath the
abscess in their deaths burrowing into
and around the great firm muscles like a
damn black river running around and
between the muscles like a hot stream
wounds expanding outward decaying
orchids or crushed carnations terrible
flowers of flesh wounds from which the
dark blood is spewed out in clots mixed
with the ominous gas bubbles floating on
the fresh flood of the still continuing
secondary hemorrhage gangrene is a
cunning creepy fellow as this one alive
yes he lives technically speaking he is
alive give him saline intravenously
perhaps the innumerable tiny cells of
his body will remember they may remember
the hot salty sea their ancestral home
their first food with the memory of a
million years they may remember other
tides other oceans and life being born
of the sea and Sun it may make them
raise their tired little heads drink
deep and struggle back to life again it
may do that and this one will he run
along the road beside his mule at
another harvest and cry with pleasure
and Happiness no that one will never run
again how can you run with one leg what
will he do why he'll sit and watch the
other boys run what will he think he'll
think what you and I would think what's
the good of pity don't pity him
pity would diminish his sacrifice he did
this for the defense of China help him
lift him off the table carry him in your
arms why he's as light as a child yes
your child my child anymore for Japanese
prisoners bring them in in this
community of pain there are no enemies
cut away their blood-stained uniform
stop the hemorrhage lay them beside the
others why they're alike as brothers are
these soldiers professional man killers
no these are amateurs and arms work
men's hands these are workers in uniform
no more six o'clock in the morning god
it's cold in this room open the door
over the distant dark blue mountains a
pale faint light appears in the east in
an hour The Sun will be up to bed and
sleep for the rest of this essay Bethune
more-or-less
echoes the sentiments that were being
made at the same time by American Major
General Smedley Butler he was one of the
most decorated officers in US military
history and a two-time Medal of Honor
winner he had written in 1935 that war
is a racket the corporations benefit
from war and make the profits the people
pay the bills and do the fighting
Bethune used his strongest language to
echo what general Butler was also saying
and he condemned these pillars of
society who are the ontological cause of
all the suffering and misery Bethune
witnessed firsthand in North China it
was these months late 1938 and up until
his death in 1939 that dr. Henry Norman
Bethune wrote his name into the history
books and into the hearts of the people
of the new China
Bethune saw that the Chinese Communists
were starving for the necessary funds to
aid the people in the territories they
controlled he felt it was more necessary
to return to North America to raise
money for this cause than it was to
remain behind stitching up soldiers and
picking bullets out of the bodies of
wounded warriors he was still making
plans for his return to Canada and the
US when he was called to the front to
handle medical emergencies in Lyon for
hours by car from Beijing and just
northwest of boudin it was there on
October 28 1939 that he injured himself
now there are two versions of how this
happened but suffice to say supplies
were low or non-existent when fate
brought Norman Bethune to this part of
North China he was there as he had been
for more than a year
the battlefield there in ancient Hebei
province peeking man had roamed there
seven hundred thousand years ago it was
the site of the ancient states of yin
Jin of jobs Holloway and others in this
most ancient part of an ancient land
whilst operating on some poor soul who
history does not say lived or died
afterward without surgical gloves of any
kind disposable medical gloves wouldn't
make an appearance till 1964 Norman
Bethune either pricked his finger on a
sharp surgical instrument or the jagged
bone of the injured soldier he operated
on as the infection from the injury took
hold and began to slowly poison him from
the fingertips up to his shoulder in his
dying moments he wrote a letter to his
commanding officer general niranjan
which said dear commander nyet today I
feel really bad probably I have to say
farewell to you forever
I am fatally ill I'm going to die the
last two years have been the most
significant the most meaningful years of
my life sometimes it has been lonely but
I have found my highest fulfillment here
among my beloved comrades I have no
strength now to write more to you and to
all my comrades a thousand thanks please
send a letter to Tim buck the general
secretary of the Canadian Communist
Party addresses number 10 Wellington
Street Toronto Canada please also make a
copy for the Committee on international
aid to China and democratic alliance of
Canada tell them I am happy here please
give my Kodak retina - camera - comrade
chef a Norman Bethune 4:20 p.m. November
11th 1939 the septicemia that set in
following the injury he sustained during
surgery on an infected head wound of a
fallen comrade ultimately killed him and
dr. Norman Bethune died in the morning
of November 13th 1939 his body was
transported by his medical team for
for days along icy mountain paths ten
thousand Chinese later showed up to file
past his body and show their respects on
December twenty first a month in a week
after dr. Henry Norman Bethune passed
from this earth Chairman Mao
immortalized him forever when he
released this essay called geniune by
chillin in memory of Norman Bethune I'll
just read some excerpts for you it's
about one page and sort of encapsulate
s' why he became such a beloved figure
in the conscience of the Chinese people
Mao had written Comrade Norman Bethune a
member of the Communist Party of Canada
was around 50 when he was sent by the
communist parties of Canada and the
United States to China he made light of
travelling thousands of miles to help us
in our war of resistance against Japan
he arrived in yen on in the spring of
last year went to work in the Wutai
mountains and to our great sorrow died a
martyr at his post what kind of spirit
is this that makes a foreigner
selflessly adopt the cause of the
Chinese people's liberation as his own
it is the spirit of internationalism the
spirit of communism from which every
Chinese communist must learn
comrade Bethune spirit his utter
devotion to others without any thought
of self was shown in his great sense of
responsibility in his work and his great
warm-heartedness towards all comrades
and the people every communist must
learn from him no one who returned from
the front failed to express admiration
for Bethune whenever his name was
mentioned and none remained unmoved by
his spirit in the Shaanxi chaja our club
a border area no soldier or civilian was
unmoved who had been treated by dr.
Bethune or had seen how he worked every
communist must learn this true communist
spirit from comrade Bethune comrade
Bethune was a doctor the art of healing
was his profession and he was constant
perfecting his skill which stood very
high in the eighth route army x' medical
service his example is an excellent
lesson for those people who wish to
change their work the moment they see
something different and for those who
despise technical work as of no
consequence or as promising no future
comrade Bethune and I met only once
afterward he wrote me many letters but I
was busy and wrote him only one letter
he did not even know if he ever received
it
I am deeply grieved over his death now
we are all commemorating him which shows
how profoundly his spirit inspires
everyone we must all learn the spirit of
absolute selflessness from him with this
spirit everyone can be very useful to
the people a man's ability may be great
or small but if he has this spirit he is
already noble minded and pure a man of
moral integrity and above vulgar
interests a man who is of value to the
people the three phases of his life that
are most remembered you know his days as
an extravagant hard-drinking
hard-partying pioneering thoracic
surgeon in Montreal in Detroit then his
groundbreaking contributions to combat
medicine in Spain and his tireless
devotion to the Chinese people you know
being a communist party member in such a
die-hard progressive liberal made Norman
Bethune a somewhat polarizing figure not
everyone liked him if not for Chairman
Mao lionizing him like he did perhaps we
might not even be talking about him
today he would have simply been one of
perhaps hundreds or thousands of
Westerners who had anonymously made
their mark in some big or small way he
fought against the oppression of
depression-era Canadians and Americans
down on their lock winding up on the
wrong side of the line that capitalism
sort of draws in the sand you see what
Bethune learned when he became a doctor
early on in life was that politics and
economics had a direct link to Public
Health and hygiene song Ching Ling
Madame Sun yat-sen said of Norman
Bethune that he
a world hero quote he lived worked and
fought in three countries Canada which
was his native land Spain where
forward-looking men of All Nations
flocked to fight in the first great
people's resistance to the darkness of
Nazism and fascism and in China where he
helped our guerrilla armies to capture
and build new basis of national freedom
and democracy in territory which the
military fascists of Japan fondly hoped
they had conquered and where he helped
us forge the mighty People's Army which
finally liberated all China in a special
sense he belongs to the peoples of these
three countries in a larger sense he
belongs to all who fight against
oppression of nations and of people's
Madam's son also said quote these things
dr. Bethune accomplished amid conditions
such as no medical man without a broad
understanding of his task possibly of
coped with he accomplished them in
mountain villages and the most primitive
parts of China almost without any
previous knowledge of the language of
the people among whom he worked and
without any strength in his own
tuberculosis ravaged body apart from his
burning conviction and iron will she
summed up what he meant to China and
declared quote the new China will never
forget dr. Bethune he was one of those
who helped us become free his work and
memory will remain with us forever song
Ching Ling by the way condemned her
brother-in-law Chiang kai-shek
personally for blockading the ports of
China that prevented necessary drugs and
medical supplies to get to the interior
of China
she said Bethune could have been saved
if there was any supply left of sulfa
drugs to treat him there are Norman
Bethune statues parks colleges
scholarships schools awards and whatnot
all over China and in Canada and the US
as well you can visit his tomb in the
city of sure Chuang
in Hebei province he is interred at the
martyrs cemetery there as I said there's
no shortage of source material from his
life he was a very prolific writer left
behind a whole bunch of paintings
drawings and photos to just go on a good
old internet and feel free to get lost
for a few hours there is plenty of
information on Norman Bethune and videos
as well to keep you busy there's also
the 1990 Hollywood production starring
one of my all-time faves Donald
Sutherland Bethune the making of a hero
with Dame Helen Mirren playing Frances
penny Bethune well she didn't get her
DBE until 2003 this was quite a life so
that's it everyone sorry again for the
delay and to all my cherished listeners
from st. John's to Whitehorse and all
points in between I hope I didn't offend
you with my meager attempts to get the
word out about your great national hero
you don't have to agree with his
politics what Norman Bethune was able to
achieve in his short life and to be able
to be held up to more than a billion
people as someone to admire and model
themselves after isn't too bad of a
legacy he was blessed with great
personal gifts despite his character
faults and all his affairs and whatever
other dirt has been dug up by now this
was a giving man in the end and well
worth knowing about take care everyone
and it's my highest of hopes that you'll
join me next week for another exciting
episode of the China history podcast